"PCG" is the name of the procedural content generation framework in Unreal Engine [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=89).
Released experimental with Unreal Engine 5.2 and the Electric Dreams sample [(3)](https://www.unrealengine.com/electric-dreams-environment) in 2023 [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=238).
Released production ready with Unreal Engine 5.7 in 2025 [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=395)
A tool to programmatically generate [[Asset]] instances,
using point sources, called samplers, and filtering to position them and spawners to create them.
The generation is implemented using [[Visual Script]].
It is also a tool to make tools to build worlds [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=103).
Integrates with a bunch of other systems in Unreal Engine [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=112).
Such as Instanced Actors, [[Geometry Script]], (add more here.)
Works both at edit time and runtime [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=139).

A good way to learn and discover what can be done in PCG is to study one of the existing PCG graphs included in the engine and sample projects, such as the Electric Dreams sample [(3)](https://www.unrealengine.com/electric-dreams-environment).

PCG is implemented as a [[Plugin]], enabled at [[Top Menu Bar]] > Edit > Plugins > Procedural Content Generation Framework (PCG).
There is also a utility plugin name Procedural Content Generation Framework (PCG) Geometry Script Interop.
See [[Geometry Script]].

The general flow is that points are generated by a sampler, modified and filtered by various nodes, and then passed to spawners to create objects in the [[Level]].

There are input and output nodes in the PCG graph, but they are optional.
They are used to pass points between PCG graphs.
Useful when having a hierarchy of PCGs, the parent can read the output points of the children.
See _Hierarchical PCG_ below.

# Typical Workflow

Typical PCG Workflow[(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=470):
- Create a PCG Graph.
- Use the PCG Graph in a PCG Component to create a PCG Volume.
- Generate.

Drag a PCG Graph from the [[Content Browser]] to the [[Level Viewport]] to create a new [[Actor]] with a PCG Component [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=487).


# Mental Model

PCG is a point scatterer combined with an object spawner [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=137).
There is a part of the PCG graph that creates [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=171) or samples points, there is a part that manipulates those points, and there is a part that spawns something at those points.
A PCG Graph consists of nodes connected to form a directed graph.
The graph typically flows from left to right, with data generation on the left side and side effects, such as spawning, on the right side.
A node has inputs and outputs, which is how data is communicated between the nodes.
The data communicated between nodes is often a point cloud but can also be other things.

# Create A PCG Graph

A PCG Graph is an [[Asset]] in the [[Content Browser]].
Create with [[Content Browser]] > right-click > PCG > PCG Graph [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=53).
PCG Graph [[Asset]]s often has a name starting with `PCG_` [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=66).
To add an instance of the PCG Graph to the [[Level]] drag it from the [[Content Browser]] to the [[Level Viewport]] [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=69).
This creates a PCG Volume [[Actor]] instance.
This [[Actor]] by default has a non-unit scale, which can lead to unexpected behavior [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=82).

In the PCG Graph we [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=496):
- Get, create, or load data.
	- Often sample something, such as a [[Spline Component]], [[Static Mesh Component]], or [[Landscape]].
- Process the data into a data set.
	- Filter, 
- Perform metadata operations.
	- Transform, bounds.
- Generate artifacts.
	- Such as spawning [[Static Mesh]]es.


# Example PCG Graph

Here is an example PCG Graph that spawns tress on the parts of a [[Landscape]] that is painted with the Grass layer [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=538):
Get Landscape Data > Surface Sampler > Filter Attribute Elements (Grass) > Transform Points (jitter, rotate, scale) > Static Mesh Spawner (`SM_Tree`).


# PCG Graph Editor

The PCG Graph is a [[Visual Script]].
It is edited in the PCG Graph Editor [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=101).
Has a Palette panel with all the nodes that can be used.
Has a [[Details Panel]] showing the settings of the currently selected node,
or the PCG Graph itself if no node is selected.
Has a Graph panel where nodes are created and connected.
Nodes are created either by dragging them from the Palette panel or by right-click in the Graph panel.
Has a Preview panel (Name?) that is used to inspect the values of data as it flows through the graph.

It has an Input node and an Output node.

Changes made in the PCG Graph Editor show up immediately on instance in the [[Level Viewport]],
so it is helpful to keep one in view while editing.

Nodes can be temporarily disabled, i.e. toggle evaluation, by hitting E on the keyboard.
This is useful on Spawner nodes for hiding the thing they spawn, making it easier to see what is going on when working with points earlier in the network.


## Keyboard shortcuts

- E: Toggle evaluation of the selected node.
	- Node becomes grayed out.
- D: Toggle debugging rendering of point output of the selected node [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=690).
	- Can also be enabled with [[Details Panel]] > Debug > Debug [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=699).
	- Node gets a teal icon in the top-left corner.
	- This will spawn [[Static Mesh]]es where that node's output points are [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=701).
	- The spawned meshes are displayed in the [[Level Editor]].
	- There is also a Debug node. Not sure what that does.
- A: Inspect. The node's output is listed in the Inspect panel [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=570).
	- The Inspect panel is a big table.
	- (Is the Inspect panel named Attributes panel now?)
	- The node gets yellow icon.


# Nodes

The PCG Graph consists of nodes.
A node can produce, manipulate, or consume data.
In PCG that data is often points, but other types are possible.
The nodes have input and output pins.
Wires are used to connect the output pins of one node to the input pins of another node.
This is how data is communicated between nodes.
The type of data a pin accepts is shown using the pin's icon and color.
- Points: Three blue circles stacked vertically [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=187).
- Any / Wildcard: Three gray circles stacked vertically [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=353).
- Orange horizontal ellipse with shorter bar under it: Attribute descriptor [(5)]().

It is common that a node operates on a subset of the (per-particle) data, or fields, passed to it.
For example, a node may manipulate only the position property of a point.
It is also possible that a node reads from one field of the data but write to another.
For example, a node may read the Z coordinate and write to the Static Mesh attribute creating a setup where we have one type of meshes at the lower sections of a high-rise building and another type of meshes at the higher sections.


## Input Source And Output Target

Some nodes allow you to configure which fields should be read and written.
In these cases it is common that the field to read is configured by setting Input Source in the Details panel, and the field to write by setting Output Target.
Click the + button to get a list of suggestions [(https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=454)](5), though this list is incomplete.
You can enter any name for Output Target, if the field doesn't exist yet then a new attribute with that name is created [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=516).

Use dot-notation to access nested members.
For example, `$Position.Z` will give you the Z coordinate of each point's position [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=847).
Rotations have `Roll`, `Pitch`, and `Yaw`.

There are special keywords that can be used for Input Source and Output Target:
- `@Last`: The field most recently accessed [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=430), often (always?) by the preceding node.
	- For example, if the preceding node as an Add Attribute node that an attribute called Complexity then an Attribute Noise node using `@Last` for Input Source will add noise to the Complexity attribute.
	- What if an input pin has multiple wires? Is @Last tracked per node on the other side of the input wire?
- `@Source`: Use the input field also as the output [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=492).
	- Used when you want to manipulate a field.
	- By setting Output Target to `@Source` you only need to modify Input Source to change which field to modify.
	- There is no risk of, for example, accidentally setting Density to a modified Scale since changing the Input Source from Scale to Density will also, automatically, change Output Target in the same way.

There is a special name for the last attribute to be modified that can be used when configuring a node: `@Last` [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=627), [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=658).
A node's [[Details Panel]] > Target Attribute can be set to `@Last` instead of an explicitly named attribute.
The top of the Attributes panel display which attribute is named by `@Last` for the currently selected node.


# Point

A point is the fundamental unit of information in PCG.
Most nodes create, manipulate, or consume points.
A point set is a collection of points.
A point set carries a bunch of data, one element per point.
The data comes in two variants:
- Properties: Mandatory data, all points have this.
- Attributes / metadata: Extra data the graph have added to the points.

Collectively the properties and attributes are called fields.

## Properties

A point has a set of mandatory data, called Properties [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=570).
The Properties are:
- Position.
- Rotation.
- Scale
- Density.
- Bounds Min.
- Bounds Max.
- Color.
- Steepness.
	- Don't know what this is. Density gradient across the bounds?
- Seed.

In the Attributes panel the properties are prefixed with a `$` [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=607).
So we have `$Position` and `$Scale` rather than just Position and Scale.

A point has a scale, which is used by Static Mesh Spawner to set the scale of the spawned Static Mesh Instance.

A point has a density, which is a scalar value.
Can be used to filter and prune points before they reach a Spawner.

We can inspect the environment around a point and use that to assign a density to the point.
For example, we can set a point's density to the dot product between a mesh's surface normal and the up vector to get higher density on top of an object and lower density on the sides and below.
This is done with the Normal To Density node.
(
At least that is what I think it does.
We pass it points and in the [[Details Panel]] we set a normal.
)

Filtering is done with the Density Filter node.
It has a range of density values and a toggle for either accepting or rejecting points within that range.


## Attributes / Metadata

A point has a set of optional data, called attributes or metadata.
An attribute is like a variable on a point that we as PCG Graph designers can add.
An attribute is added to a point set with the Add Attribute node [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=252).
For more details see the _Add Attribute_ section below.

A PCG graph that transform points must take care to always propagate the attributes or else they are lost.
The Copy Point has a Copy Metadata boolean input.
(
How does one propagate attributes in general?
Does the Transform Point node copy the attributes?
)

For example, a point can carry a [[Material]] and a [[Static Mesh]] by adding attributes of those types.

The Mutable Metadata node will give you the metadata for the point data.
The metadata contains the attributes.

A Point Data can be converted to an Attribute Set with the Point To Attribute Set node [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=545).
Point To Attribute Set returns an attribute set with one entry per point.
It strips away the properties and leaves just the attributes.


## Add Attribute 

Attributes are added to a point data with the Add Attribute node.
With an Add Attribute node selected can can configure the attribute to be created from the [[Details Panel]].
- Output Target: The name of the new attribute
- Type: The data type for the new attribute, such as Double or Vector.
- Value: The value to assign to the new attribute.

The Create (Vector|String|...) Attribute node will create a new attribute of type Vector|String|....
This can be done from the Execute With Context of a _Blueprint Extension_,
before calling Iteration Loop to actually populate the newly created attributes.
In Iteration Loop Body use Set (Vector|String|...) Attribute to set the attribute for a particular particle.


## Debugging Attributes

By selecting a node and hitting the A key we bind that node to the Attributes panel [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=198).
The node is marked with a yellow circle in the top-left corner to indicate that this is the node selected for inspection.
The Attributes panel is a grid view with one row per particle and one column per field, i.e. property or attribute.
The columns that display a property has a title prefixed with `$`.
The columns that display an attribute has no prefix on the title.


# Something About Multiple Sets Of Points In A Point Set

A node can output multiple sets of points on the same pin [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=1446).
That is, a wire can carry more than a single set of points.
When enabling the Attribute inspector, the D keyboard shortcut, the Attributes panel may not display all points output by the node.
The Attributes panel will display one set of points at the time.
At the top of the Attributes panel there is a drop-down where we can select which set of points we want to have listed [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=1495).
In contrast, when enabling the Debug flag for a node we will get debug rendering for all points in all data sets.

One example of a node that output sets of sets of points instead of all points in a single set is the Get Actor Data node.
It creates one set of sets of points for each [[Actor]] data was read from.
Is has [[Details Panel]] > Data Retrieval Settings > Merge Simple Data that can be enabled to merge all sets of points into a single set of points [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=1520).
(
I don't know what types of data would not be considered "simple data" and thus not merged when enabling this setting.
)

The Merge Points node takes a set of sets of points and merges them to a single set of points.


# Creating Points

PCG has a bunch of nodes for creating points[(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=171).
Many of them are found under the Spatial category in the PCG Graph > right-click menu.
Examples:
- Create Points
- Create Points Grid
- Create Points Sphere

A node input or output pin that accepts point data is colored blue.

# Point Samplers

A central concept in PCG is points.
Points are generated by Samplers.
- Mesh Sampler: Generates points on the surface of a [[Static Mesh]].
- Spline Sampler: Generate points along a [[Spline Component]].


# Mesh Sampler

Requires the Procedural Content Generation Framework (PCG) Geometry Script Interop plugin to be enabled.

Has [[Details Panel]] > Settings > Static Mesh that should be set to the [[Static Mesh Asset]] to generate point on.

Has [[Details Panel]] > Settings > Sample Method:
- One Point Per Triangle: 
- One Point Per Vertex:
- Poisson Sampling: 

Can do voxelization by enabling [[Details Panel]] > Voxelize Options > Voxelize.
Places a regular grid over the mesh and sample one point per grid cell.
Set Voxel Size to get the amount and density of points you need.

## Spline Sampler

Sample points along a spline.
Typically used together with a [[Spline Component]] in the same [[Actor]] as the PCG Component and a Get Spline Data (Self) node.

[[Details Panel]] > Settings > Mode:
- Subdivision: Sample according to the spline's control points. Not sure how though.
- Distance: Sample along the spline at even intervals. The distance is set with Distance Increment just below Mode in the [[Details Panel]].

Output of the Spline Sampler node is a set of points.


# Point Manipulation

## Transform Points

A node that modifies point transformations [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=1178).
Translate, rotate, and scale points, with some randomness.
For each attribute we can set a minimum and maximum value to randomize between.
Set Rotation Min to 0.0 and Rotation Max to 360 to get points that are rotated in any direction.

A point's scale is used by Static Mesh Spawner to set the scale of the spawned Static Mesh Instance.


## Copy Points

(
Not sure what this does really, describing how it was used in the [Unreal Fest 2023 PCG introduction presentation](https://youtu.be/LMQDCEiLaQY?t=1186).
)

Transform points from one coordinate system to another.
Has two inputs:
- Source: The points to transform from world space to the target space.
- Target: The target space.

The output is the Source points transformed to be around the Target points instead.
If there are many Target points then the Input points are duplicated for each.

The Target can be the location of an [[Actor]] to make the points be around that [[Actor]].
See _Get Actor Data_ below.

## Point Filter

Split the input points into two sets according to a predicate.
We get the `true` set and the `false` set.
Called the Inside Filter and the Outside Filter, respectively.

## Merge

Take two sets of points and merge them to a single set.

## Point Filter > Merge

We can use Filter and Merge together to modify a subset of a set of points.
Use a Point Filter node to extract the set of points that should be modified.
Route the Inside Filter through a set of point modification nodes, such as Projection or Transform Point.
Route both the output of the last modification node and the Outside Filter output of the Point Filter node to a Merge node.
The effect is that we start with a set of point, split them in two sets based on a predicate, modified one of the sets but left the other unchanged, and then merged them back to a single set again.

## Spatial Noise

(
Not sure what this actually does.
Move points?
Spawn points?
)

Can be set to one of several modes with [[Details Panel]] > Settings > Mode.
- Perlin 2D
- Caustic 2D
- Voronoi 2D
- Fractional Brownian 2D
- Edge Mask 2D

May need to set Transform > Scale very large, multiple hundreds, for the noise pattern to show up.


## Arithmetic

Add, subtract, multiply, etc.
Must specify which attribute of the inputs that should be operated on.
This is done at [[Details Panel]] > Input > Input Source \[12\].
Can be
- Density
- Bounds (Min|Max)
- Extents
- Color
- and more.

I don't know what happens to the other attributes.
Is the data from A used?
Does the output only have density?


## Distance

Compute the distance between a set of Source points and a set of Target points.
Don't know how the two sets are combined.
Don't know what happens if the two sets don't have the same number of points.


## Attribute Noise

Apply noise to a particular point attribute [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=394).
Have a set of operators that can be applied between the source attribute value and the noise value [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=506):
- Set
- Minimum
- Maximum
- Add
- Multiply
- and more.

The output can be different from the input.
(Haven't tested the following, I'm speculating.)
For example, we can take the Z coordinate, multiply by some noise value, and then write to density.
Then we get high density at the top and low density at the bottom of the point cloud.

## Normal To Density

Modifies the densities of the incoming points so that those that have a normal aligned with the normal set in the Normal To Density node's [[Details Panel]] get a high density,
while points with a normal orthogonal to the target normal get a low density.

## Merge

A node to which any number of points wires can be connected to the input pin.
All those points will be passed to the output.
Useful when we have multiple paths each with a Static Mesh Spawner, a Mesh Sampler, and a Copy Points.
Merge makes it so that we get points on all of the meshes.

## Projection

Don't know yet.

# Spawners

The purpose of a PCG graph is (often?) to instantiate things, i.e. to spawn them.
A Spawner node takes a set of points as input and generates a set of instances as output [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=1040).
Different types of spawners have different types of outputs.
For example, the Static Mesh Spawner outputs [[Static Mesh]]es.

The spawned instances are placed relative to the owning PCG Volume.
Or maybe not, maybe it is in world space.
Maybe there is a setting for this.

The scale of the spawned thing is determined by the scale of the point given to the Spawner.

## Static Mesh Spawner

Spawns a [[Static Mesh]] at the input points [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=1147).
Can select between a collection of multiple meshes.
The list of meshes to chose between is configured at [[Details Panel]] > Mesh Selector > Mesh Entries.

The mesh to spawn is selected in different ways depending on what [[Details Panel]] > Settings > Mesh Selector Type is set to.
- PCG Mesh Selector Weighted: For each point pick a single [[Static Mesh]] from the Mesh Entries list. Higher weight means higher likelihood of being picked.
- PCG Mesh Selector By Attribute: Reads a Static Mesh attribute from the point to select which mesh to spawn [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=1645).
	- [[Details Panel]] > Mesh Selector > Template Descriptor can be used to tweak the [[Static Mesh]] settings of the spawned meshes.


### PCG Mesh Selector Weighted

Can have a selection of [[Static Mesh Asset]]s to randomly select from,
based on a weighted random distribution.

The set of [[Static Mesh Asset]]s that the Static Mesh Spawner selects among is set at [[Details Panel]] > Settings > Mesh Entries, which is an array.
Each element has:
- Static Mesh: The [[Static Mesh Asset]] to instantiate when this element is selected for a point.
- Weight: How likely this entry is to be selected for an  input point.

### PCG Mesh Selector By Attribute

Reads the mesh to spawn from each point's Mesh (Name?) attribute / metadata.
Used when creating a _Configurable PCG Level Instance_.


## Spawn Actor

Spawn an [[Actor]] for every input point [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=1047).
Has [[Details Panel]] > Settings > Template Actor Class which is the [[Actor]] type to spawn.
To modify the [[Property]]s of the instances of the Template Actor Class, tick [[Details Panel]] > Settings > Allow Template Actor Editing [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=1089).
This will show the [[Details Panel]] > Settings > Template Actor category, which is populated with the [[Property]]s of the selected [[Actor Class]].
It is also possible to use a parameter to configure the Template Actor, but I don't know how yet.

Each spawned [[Actor]] is placed in a folder in the [[Outliner]] with a name based on the name of the PCG Graph that spawned them [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=1076).
Unless the Spawn Actor node has had it's Attach Options changed [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=1134).
An [[Actor]] spawned by a PCG can be modified, e.g. moved, in the level, but this is discouraged since any edits we make will be undone the next time the PCG Graph is reevaluated and all the [[Actor]]s are recreated [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=1076).

We can remove all the spawned [[Actor]]s from the level by selecting the PCG Graph [[Actor]] instance and click [[Details Panel]] > PCG > Cleanup [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=1081).

After spawning the Spawn Actor node can call functions on the newly created instance by adding the names of the functions to call to [[Details Panel]] > Settings > Post Spawn Function Names.

Has [[Details Panel]] > Settings > Actor Overrides.
Not sure what this does.
What is being overridden?
What happens with that data later?
Where does it takes the data from? Metadata > Attributes?


# Parameters

Our PCG Graph can expose parameter to users of the graph [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=743), [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=932).
For example, a PCG Graph may contain a Transform Points node that randomly scales the points and the minimum and maximum scale can be parameters.
Parameters are added in the Graph Parameter panel [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=751), [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=939) by clicking the + button.
Double-click a parameter's name to rename it.
Click on the colored icon to the left of the name to select a type for the parameter.
right-click on the colored icon to chose if the parameter should be a single value or a container.
Drag a parameter to an input pin on a graph node to pass the parameter's value into the node.
For example, into the Scale Min and Scale Max input pins of a Transform Points node.
Or right-click in the graph and search for the parameter's name, it will show up in the Graph Parameters category.

Parameters are attributes in the graph [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=955).

The parameters can be set in the [[Details Panel]] when selecting a PCG Component instance in the [[Level Viewport]], under PCG > Instance > Parameter Overrides.
Tick the checkbox to enable editing of the value input box.

The parameters can also be set in a PCG Graph Instance [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=773).
Content Browser > PCG Graph > right-click > Create PCG Graph Instance.
The PCG Graph Instance is edited like a data-only Blueprint, meaning the asset editor is basically just a [[Details Panel]] where the Parameter Overrides are available.
We we can create a bunch of variants of our main PCG Graph for different purposes.
For example Small Rocks with small Scale Min and Scale Max, and Large Rocks with large Scale Min and Scale Max.


# World Inspection

PCG contains a bunch of nodes for inspecting the world.

## Get Actor Data

A node that is used to get information about an [[Actor]] or multiple [[Actor]]s in the [[Level]] [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=1364).
Which [[Actor]] or [[Actor]]s is controlled with [[Details Panel]] > Settings > Actor Filter.
By default it inspects itself, the PCG Volume [[Actor]].
Can also be set to All World Actors.
In this mode we can filter either by class or by [[Actor Tag]] by setting Actor Selection.
The Must Overlap Self setting is used to limit the set of [[Actor]]s to those overlapping the PCG Actor's [[Box Collision]].

[[Details Panel]] > Settings > Mode controls what in the [[Actor]] the node gets data for.
- Parse Actor Components: Get data for all [[Actor Component]]s in the [[Actor]].
- Get Single Point: Get the world location of the [[Actor]], including bounds.
- Get Data From Property: Don't know.
- Get Data From PCG Component: Don't know.
- Get Data From PCG Component Or Parse Components: Don't know.

The output of Get Actor Data can be connected to a Points input pin.
A To Point node will be created.


## Get Spline Data

A node that reads data from a [[Spline Component]].

When the [[Details Panel]] > Settings > Actor Filter is set to Self then the PCG Component's owning [[Actor]] will be searched for a [[Spline Component]] to read data from.
I don't know how to select a particular [[Spline Component]] if there are multiple.

The output from Get Spline Data can be passed to Spline Sampler to generate points along the spline.

## Get Landscape Data

Get Landscape Data is a node that produces something Landscape-related.
(
Not entirely sure what.
)
The output of the Get Landscape Data node can be passed to a Surface Sampler node to get points on the [[Landscape]] surface.
The points sampled from a [[Landscape]] will be given attributes for the weights of the [[Landscape Layer]]s [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=673).

Combine with a Projection node to move the point to the Landscape surface.
The [_Procedural Content Generation Tools in UE5: Overview and Roadmap | Unreal Fest 2023_ 40:00](https://dev.epicgames.com/community/learning/talks-and-demos/M7DW/unreal-engine-procedural-content-generation-tools-in-ue5-overview-and-roadmap-unreal-fest-2023) presentation combined this with a BP PCGE Preserve Local Z node.
I don't know if this node is included or a custom Blueprint Extension part of the demo project only.


## World Ray Hit Query

Don't know yet.
A ray cast, I assume.


# PCG Mode

The PCG Mode is a way to interact with the PCG system directly in the [[Level Viewport]] [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=834).
For example, we can draw splines directly on a [[Landscape]] and make that create a road along that spline.


# Extending PCG With C++

We can extend the PCG system by adding our own custom nodes that run our own custom C++ code.
The C++ code for a node consists of two parts:
- Editor: Inherits from `UPCGSettings`.
	- Some parts of the `UPCGSettings` subclass also exists at runtime, things like input and output definitions.
- Runtime: Inherits from `IPCGElement`.
	- This is what defines what the node does.

The `UPCGSettings` subclass defines things like the name of the node and what inputs and outputs it has.
The `IPCGElement` subclass defines the operation of the node.


## Engine Classes

The main work of a PCG node is performed by the `ExecuteInternal` virtual member function.
It receives a `FPCGContext` parameter.
The `FPCGContext` instance provides access to the `UPCGSettings` subclass instance, ways to access the input data, and ways to define the output data.
The `FPCGContext` type has a `FPCGDataCollection` member named `InputData`.
This is how the `ExecuteInternal` member function get access to the inputs to the node, as configured by the user in the PCG Graph.
`FPCGDataCollection` contains, or at least gives access to, a set of `TArray<FPCGTaggedData>`.
An `FPCGTaggedData` carries information such as pin name and tags, but the central bit is a `UPCGData` instance.
`UPCGData` is an abstract class that has a whole bunch of subclasses.
The most commonly used are:
- `UPCGPointData`: A point cloud.
- `UPCGSpatialData`: Base class of `UPCGPointData`, and a few other `UPCGData` subclasses.
- `UPCGPrimitiveData`: Pointer to a Primitive Component.
- `UPCGParamData`: Not sure. `EPCGDataType` calls this _Attribute Set_.
- And many, many more.

So:
`FPCGContext` > `FPCGDataCollection` > `FPCGTaggedData` > `UPCGData`.

- `FPCGContext`: The input when a node is executed. Holds per-execution state. Has `InputData` and `OutputData`.
- `FPCGDataCollection`: Container for `FPCGTaggedData`.
- `FPCGTaggedData`: Container for `UPCGData`.
- `UPCGData`: Base class for a bunch of data storage types.

Input to a node is delivered on a pin of that node.
Each pin is configured to receive data of a particular type, i.e. of some `UPCGData` subclass.
The node can control this by overriding the the `UPCGSettings::InputPinProperties` and `UPCGSettings::OutputPinProperties` virtual member functions.
Each input and output pin described by `/(In)|(Out)/putPinProperties` has a `EPCGDataType` member, which is en enum that has an enum literal for each subclass of `UPCGData`.
A central consideration when creating a new PCG node is how many input and output pins it should have, and what `EPCGDataType` should be set to for those pins.


### `UPCGContext`

The state for a particular execution of a particular node.
Has `InputData` and `OutputData`, which are both `FPCGDataCollection`.
Through `InputData` we can access the data passed to each input pin in the PCG Graph.
Through `OutputData` we can write data that should be passed out through each output pin in the PCG Graph.
Gives access to the corresponding `UPCGSettings` instance with `GetInputSettings<T>` where `T` is your `UPCGSettings` subclass type.


### `UPCGDataCollection`

A bag of inputs or outputs, stored in the form of `FPCGTaggedData` instances.
There are multiple ways to get at particular `FPCGTaggedData` instances from within a `ExecuteInternal` implementation.
- `GetAllInputs`: Get the complete set of `FPGCTaggedData` instances.
- `GetAllSpatialInputs`: Collect `FPCGTaggedData` instances that have a `Data` member that can be cast to `UPCGSpatialData`.
- `GetInputsByPin`: Collect `FPCGTaggedData` instances that have a given pin name.
	- The PCG Graph allows multiple wires to connect to the same input pin.
- `GetSpatialInputsByPin`: Similar to `GetInputsByPin`, but only collect `FPCGTaggedData` instances that have a `Data` member that can be cast to `UPCGSpatialData`.
- `GetTaggedInputs`: Collect `FPCGTaggedData` instances that have a `Data` member that have a given tag and can be cast to `UPCGSpatialData`.
- `GetAllSettings`: Collect `FPCGTaggedData` instances that have a `Data` member that can be cast to `UPCGSettings`.
	- This one is weird to me. `UPCGSettings` is used to describe PCG nodes. Why would be need to pass such data between PCG nodes?
- `GetAllParams`: Collect `FPCGTaggedData` instances that have a `Data` member that can be cast to `UPCGParamData`.
	- `UPCGParamData` is sometimes called _Attribute Set_.
- `GetTaggedParams`: Collect `FPCGTaggedData` instances that have a `Data` member that have the given tag and can be cast to `UPCGParamData`.
- `GetParamsByPin`: Similar to `GetInputsByPin`, but only collect `FPCGTaggedData` instances that have a `Data` member that can be cast to `UPCGParamData`.
- `GetTaggedTypedInputs<PCGDataType>`: Collect `FPCGTaggedData` instances that have a `Data` member that have the given tag and can be cast to `PCGDataType`.

I'm not sure why some member functions have `Inputs` in their name.
There doesn't seem to be anything input-specific with them.
They read from the same `TaggedData` member container as the non-input member functions.

Also not sure why the member functions are named with `Input` since the `UPCGDataCollection` may be the `OutputData` member in a `UPCGContext`.
Is it weird to say `Context->OutputData.GetAllInputs()`?
Does that return inputs or outputs?


### `FPCGTaggedData`

One routed payload, i.e. the data that is being communicated along one wire in the PCG Graph.

Member variables:
- `UPCGData* Data`: The data that is being communicated. There are many subclasses of `UPCGData` for different kinds of data.
	- Actually stored with some indirection. For this analysis that doesn't matter much.
- `FName Pin`: The name of the pin the wire is attached to.
- `TSet<FString> Tags`: Tags associated with the data.
	- Not sure how these tags are set or used.


### `UPCGData`

Class hierarchy describing the payload associated with an `FPCGTaggedData` instance.
The most commonly used subclasses are:
- `UPCGPointData`: A point cloud.
- `UPCGSpatialData`: Base class of `UPCGPointData`, and a few other `UPCGData` subclasses.
- `UPCGPrimitiveData`: Pointer to a Primitive Component.
- `UPCGParamData`: Not sure. `EPCGDataType` calls this _Attribute Set_.
- And many, many more.


#### `UPCGPointData`

A collection of many points.
When you sample e.g. a [[Landscape]] to scatter rocks and trees and whatnot on it using the Static Mesh Spawner node then the `UPCGData` type carrying those sampled points is a `UPCGPointData` instance.

The individual points are stored as an `TArray<FPCGPoint>`.
Each point carries a fixed set of attributes:
- Transformation
- Density
- Bounds/(Min)|(Max)/
- Color
- Steepness
- Seed

Call `UPCGPointData::GetPoints`, or `GetPoint`, to get access to the individual point data.
Use `GetMutablePoints` or `SetPoints` to modify the point data.
Not sure under what circumstances we are allowed to modify the point data.
Can any `IPCGElement` subclass's `ExecuteInternal` do that at any time?

I think additional attributes, i.e. metadata, can be stored in an `UPCGPointData`, but I'm not sure how.
Probably in the `UPCGMetadata Metadata` member variable.
See _`UPCGParamData`_ below for instructions for how to access the metadata.


#### `UPCGParamData`

Sometimes called an attribute set.
A metadata table where each attribute is a column and there is a row for each "thing" in the table.
For example, the Get Actor Data node outputs this type of data when Data Retrieval Settings > Mode is set to Get Components Reference.
Then each found Component becomes a row in the table and the columns are e.g. the Soft Object Path for each Component.

`UPCGParamData` doesn't store much data in itself.
Instead it makes use of the inherited `UPCGMetadata UPCGData::Metadata` member variable container.

`UPCGMetadata` stores attributes as a list of (name, type) pairs.
`UPCGMetadata` stores entries (The rows in the table analogy.) in some way,  not sure how yet.
The entries are accessed using keys.
Each entry contains one value for each attribute.
To continue the Get Actor Data example:
- The output of the Get Actor Data node is Attribute Set, which really means `UPCGParamData`.
- The `UPCGMetadata` container in that `UPCGParamData` instance contains a column named Component Reference.
- The Component Reference column has type Soft Object Path.
- Each Component found in the Actor produces one entry in the `UPCGMetadata` table, and thus one Soft Object Path value associated with the Component Reference attribute.

Unreal Engine provides accessor helpers to access the metadata attribute data.
- `PCGAttributgeAccessorHelpers::CreateConstAccessor`: Not sure how to use this still.
- `CreateConstKeys`: Not sure how to use this still.
- `FPCGAttributePropertyInputSelector`: Used to identify an attribute to operate on.
- `PCGAttributeAccessorHelpers::ExtractAllValues`: Get the entire table column for an attribute.

Example that reads the Soft Object Paths stored under the Component Reference attribute created by a Get Actor Data node in Get Components Reference mode:
```cpp
bool FMyPCGNodeElement::ExecuteInternal(FPCGContext* Context) const
{
	// Loop over all param-holding inputs.
	for (const PCGTaggedData& ParamInput : Context->InputData.GetAllParams())
	{
		// Get the param from the current input.
		const UPCGParamData* ParamData = Cast<UPCGParamData>(ParamInput.Data);

		// Create and configure a selector that selects the Component Reference attribute.
		// I'm not sure how to identify the attribute names in general.
		FPCGAttributePropertyInputSelector Selector;
		Selector.SetAttributeName(PCGAddComponentConstants::ComponentReferenceAttribute);

		// Local container for the Component Reference attribute data.
		TArray<FSoftObjectPath> ComponentRefs;

		// Extract the Component References from the attribute set into the local container.
		PCGAttributeAccessorHelpers::ExtractAllValues<FSoftObjectPath>(
	       ParamData, Selector, ComponentRefs, Context,
	       EPCGAttributeAccessorFlags::AllowBroadcastAndConstructible, // Don't know what this is.
	       /*bQuiet*/ true);

	    for (const FSoftObjectPath& ComponentPath : ComponentRefs)
	    {
		    // Do whatever work needs to be done with 'ComponentPath'.
	    }
	}
}
```

Not sure what to do if we need to access multiple attributes at the same time.
Multiple local `TArray`s and multiple calls to `ExtractAllValues`?
Is there another helper function better suited for that case?

#### `UPCGPrimitiveData`

TODO Write something here.

#### `UPCGSpatialData`

TODO Write something here.

#### /

An `ExecuteInternal` that should be able to handle many types of input can be written as follows:
```cpp
bool FMyPCGNodeElement::ExecuteInternal(UPCGContext* Context)
{
	for (const FPCGTaggedData& Input : Context->InputData.GetAllInputs())
	{
		if (const UPCGPointData* PointData = Cast<UPCGPointData>(Input.Data))
		{
			// Handle a point cloud.
		}
		else if (const UPCGParamData* ParamData = Cast<UPCGParamData>(Input.Data))
		{
			// Handle an attribute set.
		}
		else if (const UPCGPrimitiveData* PrimitiveData = Cast<UPCGPrimitiveData>(Input.Data))
		{
			// Handle a Primitive Component.
		}
		else if (const UPCGSpatialData* SpatialData = Cast<UPCGSpatialData>(Input.Data))
		{
			// Handle spatial data.
		}
	}
}
```

## `UPCGSettings` Subclass

Controls how the nodes fit into a PCG Graph and how it is displayed in the PCG Graph editor.
Things such as node title and tooltip text.
Defines what input and output pins the node should have, by overriding `UPCGSettings::InputPinProperties` and `UPCGSettings::OutputPinProperties`.
Creates the runtime / worker representation, i.e. creates an instances of an `IPCGElement` subclass.

`UPCGSettings` describe what types of input each pin should allow:
- Point data.
- Param data.
- Spatial data.

## `IPCGElement` Subclass

Defines what the node does by overriding the `IPCGElement::ExecuteInternal` virtual member function.


## Writing Output


## Managing Caching

Nodes that keep data entirely within the PCG Graph are usually not a source of problems related to caching.
Nodes that modify the world can complicate things.
If possible, use the built-in spawner nodes that create Components in the PCG Actor, such as the Static Mesh Spawner node, these are managed by the PCG Framework.
I don't know what to to properly manage caching when a custom PCG node creates new objects directly in the world.

## Managing Side Effects

By side effects I mean things like calling into a third-party library from a `FPCGElement::ExecuteInternal` overriding member function and mutating state within that third-party library.
I don't know how to track / undo such side effects as the PCG Graph is partially re-evaluated.
I think you're on your own on this one.
`ExecutionLoopMode` may be relevant to look into.

## Design Considerations

Consider what type of node you are creating:
- What kind of operation should the node do?
	- Generate new data from the world state.
	- Modify incoming data.
	- Filter / group incoming data.
	- Generate new data from incoming data.
	- New data elements, or add new attributes to the existing elements?
	- Is the output type the same as the input type?
- What kind of data will the node receive?
	- Point.
	- Param / attribute set
	- Primitive
	- Spatial
- Pass-through / router.
	- Forwards whole `FPCGTaggedData` items.
	- Example: Filter By Tag.
- Point processor.
	- Input is point data.
	- Output is point data.
	- Filters, modifies, or generates points based on the input and settings.
		- By _settings_ I mean [[Property]]s with the `PCG_Override` [[Meta Property Specifier]] on the `UPCGSettings` subclass.
	- Example: Density filter.
- Param-data processor.
	- Input is attribute sets.
	- Output is attribute sets.
	- Operates per metadata entry.
	- Example: TODO Find an example.
- Spatial converter / query.
	- Input may be spatial or Actor / Component derived data.
	- Converts or samples it into something else.
	- I'm not sure what this is. The Surface Sampler node, perhaps.


# Spawn Level Instance

A [[Level Instance]] is a collection of [[Actor]]s stored as an [[Asset]].
A PCG Graph can spawn [[Level Instance]]s. [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=893).
For example, an artist can create a [[Level Instance]] containing a tree with some rocks and ferns at the base, each of these being a [[Static Mesh Actor]].
This is done by adding a bunch of [[Static Mesh Actor]]s to the [[Level Viewport]] by dragging in [[Static Mesh Asset]]s from the [[Content Browser]], selecting all the [[Actor]]s that should be included in the [[Level Instance]], right-click any of those [[Actor]]s and select Level > Create Level Instance.
This creates a [[Level Instance]] [[Asset]] in the [[Content Browser]].

In order for PCG to be able to spawn the [[Level Instance]] we must create a PCG  Data Asset from it.
This is done with [[Content Browser]] > [[Level Instance]] > right-click > Asset Actions > Create PCG Asset From Level(s) [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=928).
This data asset contains all the [[Static Mesh Actor]] transforms as points with attributes for the [[Static Mesh]] to spawn [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=931).
The [[Level Instance]] PCG Asset data is loaded with the Load PCG Data Asset node, which has [[Details Panel]] > Data > Asset which can be set to a PCG Data Asset.
The output of the Load PCG Data Asset node is the points that describe the [[Level Instance]].
Using the Copy Points node we can take a set of input points, sampled from whatever, and replace each of the input points with the set of points loaded by the Load PCG Data Asset node.
This means that when those points are fed into a Spawn Static Mesh node it will not spawn just one [[Static Mesh]] per sampled point, it will spawn all the meshes that was stored in the [[Level Instance]].
For this to work we must set Static Mesh Spawner > [[Details Panel]] > Mesh Selector > Mesh Selector Type to PCG Mesh Selector By Attribute.
This setting makes the Static Mesh Spawner read the per-point attribute that has a [[Static Mesh Asset]] reference, the attribute read from the [[Level Instance]] PCG Data Asset by the Load PCG Data Asset Node, the attribute that was defined by the Static Meshes that we added to the [[Level Instance]] that the PCG Data Asset was created from.
That attribute is named `Mesh`.

After modifying a [[Level Instance]] you need to do [[Content Browser]] > PCG Asset Data > right-click > Asset Actions > Update PCG Assets.


## Control Mesh Spawning With Actor Tags

[[Actor Tag]]s added to the [[Actor]]s from which the [[Level Instance]] and PCG Data Asset is created will show up as attributes on the points [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=980).
This can be combined with filtering in the PCG Graph to create randomized variation.
For example, add more "clutter meshes" than is necessary to the [[Level Instance]] and in the PCG Graph use filtering to only keep some fraction of them.
See the next paragraph for an example.
The tag is read not just a simple string, it becomes a typed attribute.
By default a boolean that is true for [[Actor]]s that have the tag and false for [[Actor]]s that does not.
By adding a `:` to the tag we separate a name from a value.
For example: `Intensity:0.25`.
This [[Actor Tag]] will set the attribute Intensity to the value 0.25 for the point that is created for that [[Actor]].

An example to randomize clutter [(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=980).
Start with an already created [[Level Instance]] with a collection of [[Static Mesh]] [[Actor]]s in it.
Enter [[Level Instance]] edit mode. (I don't know how to do that.)
Select some of the [[Static Mesh]] [[Actor]]s in the [[Level Instance]].
[[Details Panel]] > Actor > Advanced > Tags > Add Element > name the tag something such as "Clutter".
That would add an attribute to the points generated by the Load PCG Data Asset node with the name Clutter and value `true` for the meshes we added the [[Actor Tag]] to and `false` for the other meshes.
Exit [[Level Instance]] edit mode.
Right-click the PCG Data Asset created from the [[Level Instance]] > Asset Actions > Update PCG Assets.
In the PCG Graph, after the Load PCG Data Asset > Copy Points sequence, add a Attribute Filter node.
On the Attribute Filter node, set:
- Operator: `=`
- Attribute: `Clutter`
- Use Constant Threshold: `true`
- Type: `Boolean`
- Bool Value: `true`

Connect the Outside Filter output pin to the In pin on the Static Mesh Spawner, replacing the the previous wire coming from Copy Points.
The effect of this is that.... hmm... what is the effect of this?
Only the non-clutter is spawned?
I had expected to have some kind of randomness here to selectively include some clutter meshes for some instances and other clutter meshes for other instances.


# Profiling

[(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=1289).


# World Partition

[(2)](https://youtu.be/TbNZ4GKaTow?t=1316)


# Hierarchical PCG

## Communication between PCG Actors

One PCG graph can read the output of another PCG graph.
If that other PCG graph passes the points to the output node.
We call the PCG graph that writes to its output node the child PCG,
and the PCG graph that reads and uses those points the parent PCG.

To find the child PCG the parent PCG graph uses the Get Actor Data node.
There are several ways of using the Get Actor Data node.
One way is to set the following in the Get Actor Data node's [[Details Panel]]:
- Set Actor Filter to All World.
- Set Actor Selection to By Tag.
	- This is [[Details Panel]] > Actor > Advanced > Tag on the PCG Actor instance that we want to find.
- Set Actor Selection Tag to the tag that  you assigned to the PCG Actor instances that points should be read from.
- Set Mode to Get Data From PCG Component.
	- This is what makes is so that we read the points that the child PCG passed to its output node.
- Consider enabling Ignore Self And Children.
	- What is meant by "children"? Attached in the [[Outliner]]?
	- What happens if we don't enable this? Infinite recursion where our output points are added to our input point set ad infinitum?
- If using [[World Partition]].
	- See _PCG And World Partition_ below for more details.
	- Enable Must Overlap Self.
	- Enable Track Actors Only Within Bound.
- Connect the output of the Get Actor Data node to a To Point node.


## Nesting PCG Graphs

One PCG graph can call another PCG graph.
Similar to calling a function.
Drag the PCG graph [[Asset]] from the [[Content Browser]] into the PCG graph that should call it.
Points that the nested PCG graph pass to the output node will be available in the calling PCG graph.


# Debugging

## Debug Render Points In The Level Viewport

Right-click a node (not sure which nodes support this) and select Debug, or hit the D key [(5)](https://youtu.be/Uc8TGLIeNT0?t=804).
A teal icon will appear on the node and gray points or cubes will appear in the [[Level Viewport]].
There are the output points of the node.

The debug visualization in the [[Level Viewport]] can be configured.
Select a node in the PCG Graph and in the [[Details Panel]] find the Debug category.
The Enabled checkbox controls whether the node is doing anything or not.
A disabled node passes its inputs to the outputs unchanged.
(
How does this work if the inputs and outputs pins have different types?
Or if there are multiple pins, what gets passed where?
)

Tick the Debug checkbox to enable debug rendering in the [[Level Viewport]].
This is the same as the the D keyboard shortcut.

To change the size that the points are rendered with, change Scale Method to Absolute which will cause a Point Scale property to appear.
This is the scale of the [[Static Mesh]] rendered in the [[Level Viewport]].


## Inspect

Select an instance in the debug object drop-down menu in the tool bar.
Any node > right-click > Inspect.
A yellow icon will appear on the node.
A table of points i shown in the Inspect panel.
The number of points is shown in the top-right corner of the Inspect panel.


# PCG And World Partition

The details are unclear to me, but something along the lines of if [[World Partition]] is enabled and Is Partitioned enabled on the PCG Component that the PCG graph will be evaluated for every cell that it is in.
Whatever "is in" means.
If the graph doesn't take care to filter away points outside of its cell and those points are passed to a Spawner then every PCG instance, one per cell, will all spawn from the same set of points.
This will lead to a lot of duplicated objects created right on top of each other.

One way to prevent this is to enable Get Actor Data node > [[Details Panel]] > Settings > Must Overlap Self.
Not sure what "Self" means here.
The PCG instance, I assume, but what is its bound?
What is it that must overlap self? The [[Actor]] we are getting data from, or the points it generated?

One way to prevent this is to enable Get Actor Data node > [[Details Panel]] > Settings > Track Actor Only Within Bound.
Not sure how this differs from Must Overlap Self.

May also need to pass the points to a Cull Points Outside Actor Bounds.
Since even if the found PCG [[Actor]] itself is within the bounds, points it generate may far away, on the other side.

If there are multiple child PCG graphs that the parent PCG graph get points from then those points may be overlapping.
Discard duplicates with a Self Pruning node.
I have no idea what this does.
Can also use a Difference node.


# Blueprint Extension

We can add custom PCG graph nodes with Blueprints.

## Calling A Blueprint Extension

The node to call a Blueprint implemented node is Execute Blueprint.
In its [[Details Panel]] it has Blueprint Element Type which is the Blueprint to call.
A long list of Blueprints is included with the editor.
Several of the nodes in the Palette panel are implemented as a Blueprint and show up in this list.

Some have a circle icon, some have a circled box icon.
I don't know what these mean.

Select one and the node will change name and the [[Details Panel]] is populated with the settings for that Blueprint.

Double-click the node to open the [[Visual Script]] graph implementing the node.
This is a good way to learn and discover what can be done with a Blueprint Extension.
Create an Execute Blueprint node, set it to one of the many build-in Blueprints, and double-click to open it and see what it does.
Create a copy to get a base to start from and modify to your hearts content.

Example Blueprints that are not listed in the Palette panel:
- Mesh Sockets To Points: Emit a point for every socket on a [[Static Mesh]].
	- Must specify a [[Static Mesh Asset]] to get sockets from and a Tag that the sockets to emit points for should have.

## Creating A Blueprint Extension

We can create our own Blueprint nodes.
Create a new [[Blueprint Class]] that inherits from PCG Blueprint Element.
The operations that should be performed by the custom node are implementing by overriding functions inherited from PCG Blueprint Element.
Override a function with [[My Blueprint Panel]] > Function > Override drop-down.
- Apply Preconfigured Settings
- Execute
- Execute With Context:
	- Run once when the calling PCG graph is evaluated.
	- Call Iteration Loop to trigger calls to Iteration Loop Body.
	- Use Make PCG Tagged Data, Make Array, and Make PCG Data Collection to pass the output of Iteration Loop to the Return Node's input.
- Is Cacheable Override
- Iteration Loop Body
	- Run a number of iterations controlled  by an input pin on the node..
	- Is given the current iteration index.
	- Can access any input point.
	- See _Implementing Iteration Loop Body_ below.
- Nested Loop Body
- Node Color Override
- Node Type Override
- Point Node Body
	- Run for every point.
	- Cannot access the data for other points.
- Variable Loop Body

The node can have [[Blueprint Variable]]s.
They are created at [[My Blueprint Panel]] > Variables.
If [[Details Panel]] > Variable > Instance Editable, or the eye icon int he variable list, is enabled then that variable shows up, and is editable, in the [[Details Panel]] when an Execute Blueprint node calling this Blueprint Extension is selected,
and if the Execute Blueprint is expanded then the variables show up as input pins.

The node can have input and output pins.
These are configured at [[Class Defaults]] > [[Details Panel]] > Settings > Input & Output > Custom (Input|Output) Pins.
These are arrays.
Each array element has
- Label:
- Allowed Types:
- Allow Multiple Data:
- Allow Multiple Conne...:
- Advanced Pin:
- Tooltip:

## Implementing Iteration Loop Body

Can compute a fraction iteration progress with Iteration divided by Points, where Points is the variable passed to Iteration Loop node in Execute With Context.
Can get the location of the PCG [[Actor]] with Context > Get Original Component > Get Owner > Get Actor Transform.

A point is created with Make PCG Point.
Its details panel lists the point properties and you can enable the ones you want to specify.
The enabled properties show up as input pins on the Make PCG Point node.
One of the properties is Seed.
You should connect Compute Seed From Position to the Seed input,
and the Position input on Compute Seed From Position should be the position of the point we are about to create.
Connect the output of Make PCG point to the Point input pin on the return node.
(
Is it possible to return more than one point from an iteration?
)
It seems possible to not return any point from an iteration, by setting return node > Return Value to false.


# PCG Component

An [[Actor Component]].

Has [[Details Panel]] > Instance > Graph that is a reference to a PCG Graph [[Asset]].


# Configurable PCG Level Instance

Right-click a [[Level]] in the [[Content Browser]] > _Common_ > Scripted Asset Actions > PCG - Level To PCG Settings.
Converts all assets (What does he mean by assets? [[Static Mesh Asset]]?) to point data.
Each point carries a bunch of attributes / metadata about the static meshes in the level.
For example the [[Static Mesh Asset]] and the [[Material]].
Also information about how the [[Actor]]s were attached to each other.
These attributes / metadata is used by Static Mesh Spawner with Mesh Selector Type set to PCG Mesh Selector By Attribute.

Also has relative transform.
Tags set on the [[Actor]]s becomes a boolean attribute / metadata,
1 on the points representing an [[Actor]] that had that tag,
0 on points representing an [[Actor]] that did not have that tag.

The custom attributes / metadata setup made y PCG - Level To PCG Settings means that a new PCG graph must be created for each [[Level]] we want to turn into a PCG Level Instance.
We cannot reuse the graph or replace the root node.
We can however create helper functions, i.e. a subgraph for the actual logic and call that from all PCG Level Instance graphs.

# References

- 1: [_Introduction to PCG Workflows in Unreal Engine 5 | Unreal Fest 2023_ by Epic Games @ youtube.com 2023](https://www.youtube.com/live/LMQDCEiLaQY)
- 2: [_PCG: Introduction, Use Cases, and Production Best Practices | Unreal Fest Stockholm 2025_ by Matt Oztalay, Unreal Engine @ youtube.com 2025](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TbNZ4GKaTow)
- 3: [_Electric Dreams Environment Sample Project_ by Epic Games @ unrealengine.com](https://www.unrealengine.com/electric-dreams-environment)
- 4: [_A Tech Artists Guide to PCG_ by Chris Murphy, SheDoesArtStuff @ dev.epicgames.com/community 2024](https://dev.epicgames.com/community/learning/knowledge-base/KP2D/unreal-engine-a-tech-artists-guide-to-pcg)
	- TODO Watch this one.
- 5: [_Starting Out With PCG? Watch This First to Understand the Basics!_ by Procedural Minds @ youtube.com 2025](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Uc8TGLIeNT0)
- 

