An Unreal Engine project is stored in a file system directory and contains a number of required and optional files and subdirectories.
The entry point to the project is a file named `MyProject.uproject` stored in the root directory of the project.
Also part of the project are the subdirectories `Content`, `Source`, and `Config`.
These four things, the `.uproject` file and the three subdirectories and their content, for the definition of your project.
These should be added to both version control and backup systems.

While working on the project the subdirectories `Binaries`, `Saved`, and `Intermediate` are created.
These contain files that are generated by Unreal Editor and its tools.
These can be deleted and will be recreated when needed.

`Content` is where all your [[Asset|Assets]] are stored.
Things such as [[Texture|Textures]], [[Sound|Sounds]], [[Mesh|Meshes]], [[Blueprint Class|Blueprints]] and so on.
It stores the Unreal Engine versions of those assets.
If you use an external tool to make those assets then tool-specific files should probably be stored in another directory.

`Source` is where C++ code is stored.
This directory is divided up into subdirectories, one for each [[Module]].

``Intermediate`` is where work files needed by Unreal Editor is stored.
You will probably never need to open this directory.

`Binaries` is where output from the compiler is stored.
Libraries and executables.
But not packaged projects, i.e. runnable versions of your applications.
Where those go are selected when the package is made.

